
Merriam-Webster Logo
SINCE 1828
Login or Register
GAMES
BROWSE THESAURUS
WORD OF THE DAY
WORDS AT PLAY
SAVED WORDS

artificial adjective
Save Word
To save this word, you'll need to log in. 

Log In
ar·?ti·?fi·?cial | \ ?är-t?-'fi-sh?l  \
Definition of artificial
1: humanly contrived (see CONTRIVE sense 1b) often on a natural model : MAN-MADE
an artificial limb
artificial diamonds
2a: having existence in legal, economic, or political theory
b: caused or produced by a human and especially social or political agency
an artificial price advantage
Within these companies, qualified women run into artificial barriers that prevent them from advancing to top positions in management.
— James J. Kilpatrick
3a: lacking in natural or spontaneous quality
an artificial smile
an artificial excitement
b: IMITATION, SHAM
artificial flavor
4: based on differential morphological characters not necessarily indicative of natural relationships
an artificial key for plant identification
5obsolete : ARTFUL, CUNNING
Other Words from artificial
Synonyms & Antonyms
More Example Sentences
Learn More about artificial
Keep scrolling for more


Other Words from artificial
artificiality \ ?är-?t?-??fi-?she-?'a-?l?-?te  \ noun
artificially \ ?är-?t?-?'fi-?sh?l-?e  \ adverb
artificialness \ ?är-?t?-?'fi-?sh?l-?n?s  \ noun
Synonyms & Antonyms for artificial
Synonyms

affected, assumed, bogus, contrived, factitious, fake, false, feigned, forced, mechanical, mock, phony (also phoney), plastic, pretended, pseudo, put-on, sham, simulated, spurious, strained, unnatural
Antonyms

artless, genuine, natural, spontaneous, unaffected, uncontrived, unfeigned, unforced
Visit the Thesaurus for More 
Examples of artificial in a Sentence
 the world's first artificial heart
 This product contains no artificial colors natural substances are used.
See More
Recent Examples on the Web
In the past year, Akron schools also partnered with the Cleveland Browns Foundation to replace the field at Ellet CLC with a artificial turf, which included an appearance from player Myles Garrett at its dedication.
— Robin Goist, cleveland, "Possible tax renewal mentioned by Akron superintendent during State of the Schools address," 19 Feb. 2020
Verdugo said the injury first became a concern last May when the Dodgers played two games on the artificial turf at Tampa Bay.
— Peter Abraham, BostonGlobe.com, "Alex Verdugo’s back injury a stress fracture," 15 Feb. 2020
These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'artificial.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.

See More
First Known Use of artificial
15th century, in the meaning defined at sense 1

History and Etymology for artificial
see ARTIFICE

Keep scrolling for more


Learn More about artificial
Share artificial
Post the Definition of artificial to FacebookShare the Definition of artificial on Twitter
Time Traveler for artificial

The first known use of artificial was in the 15th century
See more words from the same century

Dictionary Entries near artificial
artifice

artificed

artificer

artificial

artificial accession

artificial asphalt

artificial bitter almond oil

See More Nearby Entries 
Phrases Related to artificial
artificial light

Statistics for artificial
Last Updated

24 Feb 2020

Look-up Popularity

Top 30% of words

Cite this Entry

“Artificial.” Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/artificial. Accessed 5 Mar. 2020.


Keep scrolling for more


More Definitions for artificial
artificial adjective
English Language Learners Definition of artificial
: not natural or real : made, produced, or done to seem like something natural
: not happening or existing naturally : created or caused by people
: not sincere
See the full definition for artificial in the English Language Learners Dictionary

artificial adjective
ar·?ti·?fi·?cial | \ ?är-t?-'fi-sh?l  \
Kids Definition of artificial
1: made by humans
an artificial lake
2: not natural in quality
an artificial smile
3: made to seem like something natural
artificial flowers
artificial flavoring
Other Words from artificial

artificially adverb
artificial adjective
ar·?ti·?fi·?cial | \ ?ärt-?-'fish-?l  \
Medical Definition of artificial
1: humanly contrived often on a natural model
an artificial limb
2: based on differential morphological characters not necessarily indicative of natural relationships
an artificial key for identification of a group of organisms
Other Words from artificial

artificially \ -?'fish-?(?-?)le  \ adverb
Keep scrolling for more

artificial adjective
ar·?ti·?fi·?cial
Legal Definition of artificial
1a: made by humans
artificial accessions
— compare NATURAL
b: caused or produced by a human and especially social or political agency
an artificial price advantage
2: arising through operation of law
Other Words from artificial

artificially adverb
Keep scrolling for more

More from Merriam-Webster on artificial
Thesaurus: All synonyms and antonyms for artificial

Spanish Central: Translation of artificial

Nglish: Translation of artificial for Spanish Speakers

Britannica English: Translation of artificial for Arabic Speakers

Comments on artificial
What made you want to look up artificial? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).

Show Comments 

WORD OF THE DAY
filch
See Definitions and Examples »

Get Word of the Day daily email!

Your email address

TEST YOUR VOCABULARY
February 2020 Words of the Day Quiz

squirrel in winter
Which is a synonym of probity?
deficient
uprightness
abundant
excitable
Spell It
Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ
Citation
Test Your Knowledge - and learn some interesting things along the way.

TAKE THE QUIZ
Love words? Need even more definitions?
Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free!

MERRIAM-WEBSTER UNABRIDGED
WORDS AT PLAY
checkered-flag
'All Set': A Phrase Beyond "Ready"
A simple phrase with a lot of meanings

alt-5e559c9ec867a
The Words of the Week - 2/28/20
Words from the week of 2/28/2020

mardi-gras-mask-with-beads
Words You'll Hear Around Mardi Gras
Have some king cake on us.

alt-5e500442daf39
The Words of the Week - 2/21/20
Words from the week of 2/21/2020

ASK THE EDITORS
alt-5dee7ce4037ca
2019 Word of the Year: Behind the Scenes
How we chose 'they'

hanger-hangar-illustrations
Is It 'Hanger' or 'Hangar'?
How to remember which is which

video literally
Literally
How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts.

video his or her
Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice?
The awkward case of 'his or her'

WORD GAMES
squirrel in winter
February 2020 Words of the Day Quiz
Two months in a row! Whoa!

TAKE THE QUIZ
cats on impossible timber
More Confusing Words—Quiz
How many of these commonly confused words do you know?

TAKE THE QUIZ
Spell It
Spell It
Can you spell these 10 commonly misspelled words?

TAKE THE QUIZ
Citation
Citation
Do you know the person or title these quotes describe?

PLAY THE GAME

Merriam Webster
Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox!

Your email address
OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES

SPANISH CENTRAL
LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY
WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS
VISUAL DICTIONARY
SCRABBLE® WORD FINDER
MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY
BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION
NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
FOLLOW US

Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Instagram
Browse the Dictionary:ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ0-9
Home Help Apps About Us Shop Advertising Info Dictionary API Contact Us Join MWU Video Word of the Year Law Dictionary Medical Dictionary Privacy Policy Terms of Use Do Not Sell My Info
Browse the Thesaurus Browse the Medical DictionaryBrowse the Legal DictionaryBrowse the Spanish-English Dictionary
© 2020 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated